{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2820
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red27\green27\blue27;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c14118\c14118\c14118;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa300\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Title: Notions of expectation and probability monads\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb1 Speaker: Paolo Perrone\
\uc0\u8232 \cb3 Abstract:\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Probability theory is a quantitative theory.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Numbers, as opposed to points of an arbitrary space, play a prominent role in probability, beceause:\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 \cb3 - First of all, probability itself is modeled as a number, between 0 and 1;\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 - The most common application of probability theory are about predicting numbers, such as prices or outcomes of noisy measurements.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 \cb3 This focus on numbers has made categorical treatments of probability quite difficult in the past few decades. However, in the past few years, the community has made significant progress by treating the quantitative nature of probability as a feature, and by modeling categorically precisely these "numerical" aspects.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Here is one such idea. When we deal with random numbers, as opposed to points of an arbitrary space, we can perform what is arguably the most important operation of probability: expectation. It has the intuition of "averaging a random variable over our uncertainty", and it has a number of applications, which we can interpret categorically:\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 \cb3 - When the number that we are averaging is a probability, we can interpret the average as a composition of probabilities, and this idea leads to probability monads and categories of kernels;\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 - When we are averaging an arbitrary quantity, we are replacing a probability distribution with a canonical element, or result. This leads to algebras of probability monads.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 \cb3 We will explore these ideas in detail, and show the probabilistic significance of the relevant universal properties.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Given time and interest, we can also abstract these ideas further, using the language of Markov categories.\
\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 No previous knowledge of probability theory is assumed.\
}